---
title: Part 2––thoughts on AI
date: 2020-11-03 20:08:39
tags:
---
It is now the 8th week of my second to last semester at zhaw for my bachelor degree in computer science. My professor gave me the assignment to write about my thinking on AI technology: especially how it (my thinking) has evolved since taking the course.  
As a baseline, I was given the article [The Seven Deadly Sins of AI Predictions](https://www.technologyreview.com/2017/10/06/241837/the-seven-deadly-sins-of-ai-predictions/) by Rodney Brooks; which I found to be eloquently written as well as inspiring.

Writing this piece is difficult because there is only so little that I understand about the AI field, even after taking a course on the subject for more than 8 weeks!  
I have tried to read in the book "Artificial Intelligence - a modern approach"--we call it the AIAMA book in shorthand-- as much as possible, but only to managed as far as the second chapter so far. Recently I learned that Stuart Russel, while being a professor of computer science, also functions as an adjunct Professor of Neurological Surgery--this somewhat explains the precision in his writings on AI and neuroscience where he seems equally fluent in both!

I used to feel ashamed for not having some basic knowledge on "Machine Learning" or AI; this would go as far as that I would pretend otherwise or try to navigate away from the topic. Shouldn't I as a computer programmer and computer science undergraduate know about these topics? I still do not understand them but at last, I longer feel the shame that originally went along with it--for they are incredibly complex topics and many people merely pretend to understand them.

### As we may think
During the last 2 months, much of my attention has been spent reading historical papers. I --and I truly wish this were different-- have very little time to read, and I ended up spending less time on my AI class then I wanted too. Hopefully, I will manage to read most of the AIAMA book until the end of the semester ...  
However, I did manage to read Vannevar Bush's article "As we may think" as well as a brilliant paper by Mark Sanderson, W. Bruce Croft titled "The History of Information Retrieval Research". You might have noticed that those papers are arguably more relevant to the field of IE (Information Retrieval) and you would be right. However, I found--and I might just be completely wrong about that--the two fields to share many similarities. Also, "As we may think" is a brilliant piece, truly inspiring and really not that far off: if you put aside the insistence on microfilm and dry-film as the technology to be used for digital-like imagery. Today it occurred to me that modern devices such as the Microsoft Surface tablets with pens or Apple's new iPad Pros come daringly close to Bushs's vision he described as the Memex device.  
However, while table-like devices have been developed I think Bush was wrong to assume--or maybe hope--that they would be used for people to conduct diligent research and share thoughts. Am I wrong to assume that iPads are mostly used media consumption? I think not, however, the Microsoft Surface tablets are mostly used on colleges by students or employees in business--and that means my original assumption is most likely narrow-minded.

### The History of AI
It is interesting to learn that in both fields IE and AI much of the groundwork has been laid a long time ago: neural nets were first mentioned by  Warren McCulloch and Walter Pitts in 1943 1) and the vector space model (the most prevalent model in use) goes back to P. Switzer in 1963. This seems rather bizarre, giving the fact that the first happened almost 50 years before I was born; and yet computer science has this air of a *relatively* fresh field.  
Even more interesting to me were the early ideas of logical machines. Those are found both in the paper on the history of IE and in V. Bush's article. This leads me to another class that I am taking called programming languages and paradigms, where we learn, among other things, about the programming language Prolog. Did the motivation behind Prolog start with the logic machines mentioned by Bush or was it uniquely suitable to solve early AI problems? I hope to find out.